# CSS
CSS (Cascading Style Sheet) is used to style (align, color, spacing, size) your HTML pages. If HTML provides the structure and furniture for a house, CSS provides the paint, finishing, and alignment.

## What does it look like?
The syntax for CSS code is:
```
[what is being styled (AKA Selectors)] {
[style properties]
}
```
For example:
```
body {
  background-color: #f2f2f2;
  margin-top: 0px;
  margin-right: 0px;
  margin-bottom: 0px;
  margin-left: 0px;
}

div {
  border: 1px solid #000000;
}

.text-large {
  font-size: 2em;
}

#main {
  padding: 5px;
  border: 1px solid #000000;
  border-radius: 3px;
}
```

## CSS Selectors
CSS Selectors are used to choose which item(s) the styling should apply to.

You can target what the styling applies to:
- by HTML element
 - syntax: ```div { /* properties */ }```
- by ID (HTML element id attribute)
 - syntax: ```#name-of-id { /* properties */ }```
- by class (HTML element class attribute)
 - syntax: ```.name-of-class { /* properties */ }```
- by a combination of selectors
 - syntax: ```div.name-of-class { /* properties */ }```
 - or: ```div#name-of-id { /* properties */ }```
 - etc
- and more

### Elements
Your styling can target HTML elements.

For example, do you want all tables to have a border? Simply target the HTML tag for tables.
```
table {
/* CSS border property goes here */
}
```
Do you want all divs to be a certain width? Again, simply target the HTML tag for divs.
```
div {
/* CSS width property goes here */
}
```
Think of all the HTML elements you've learned about, *they can all be used as CSS selectors*:
- h1 or h2 or h3, etc
 - ``` h1 { /* properties */ } ```
- div
 - ``` div { /* properties */ } ```
- ul or ol
 - ``` ul { /* properties */ } ```
- li
 - ``` li { /* properties */ } ```
- table
 - ``` table { /* properties */ } ```
- a (links)
 - ``` a { /* properties */ } ```
- p (paragraphs)
 - ``` p { /* properties */ } ```
- img
 - ``` img { /* properties */ } ```
- header
 - ``` header { /* properties */ } ```
- and many more.

Hopefully it's becoming clear now - you can target HTML elements by name in CSS.

### IDs
You can style one specific element on a page differently than the rest by assigning the element an ```id``` attribute, then targeting the id's value: (```id="value-of-id"```).

Then, in your CSS, simply target the ID's value prefixed with a hashtag, as shown:
```
#value-of-id {
[style properties]
}
```

You can give your HTML elements *unique* ID attributes, and target those in your CSS.

**IDs must be unique - the same ID cannot be used more than once on a single page.**

For example, let's give one table the unique ID of 'primary-table':
```
<table id="primary-table">
  <tr>
    <td>This is a table we want to target.</td>
  </tr>
</table>
<table>
  <tr>
    <td>This is a table we are not targeting.</td>
  </tr>
</table>
```
Now, let's target the table with an ID of 'primary-table':
```
#primary-table {
  border: 3px solid red;
}
table {
  border: 1px solid #000000;
}
```
- The ```#primary-table``` selector makes the element with ID of ```primary-table``` have a 3px red border.
- The ```table``` selector above makes all tables default to a 1px black border.
- When rules conflict, ```id``` selectors take precedence over element selectors.

### Classes
Classes are just like IDs, with the following exceptions:

1. Classes *can and should* be reused on a single page
 - Unlike IDs, which can only be used once on a page
2. Classes are assigned to HTML Elements by assigning them a 'class' attribute
 - i.e. ```<table class="large-font">```
3. In CSS, classes are targeted with a dot followed by the class name
 - i.e. ```.class-name { /* properties */ }```
4. HTML Elements can be assigned multiple classes
 - Multiple classes are separated by spaces
 - i.e. ```<table class="class-1 class-2 yet-another-class">```

#### What should classes contain?
A 'good' class is:
- *Rule 1:* Designed for reusability
- *Rule 2:* Not overly restricted by its name

##### Rule 1 - Designed for reusability
*Violation #1*
```
HTML:
<div class="div-section-1">text</p>
```
```
CSS:
.div-section-1 {
  background-color: red;
  border: 1px solid black;
  font: 12px arial, verdana;
  width: 150px;
  height: 500px;
  float: left;
}
```
In this example, the class ```div-section-1``` sets the following:
- background color of red
- 1px black border
- 12px arial font
- 150px width
- 500px height
- floated left

How many elements do you expect to need *all* of those? Probably only one, which means it is not fulfilling Rule #1.

*Improvement:* To improve that class, we should divide it into reusable parts, where possible.

For example:
```
HTML:
<div class="block-section secondary-bg secondary-font" id="div-section-1">text</p>
```
```
CSS:
.block-section {
  border: 1px solid black;
  width: 150px;
}
.secondary-bg {
  background-color: red;
}
.secondary-font {
  font: 12px arial, verdana;
}
#div-section-1 {
  height: 500px;
  float: left;
}
```
Now we have 3 reuseable classes, and one unique ID.
*Rationale:*
.block-section
- Used on any blocks which require the same border and width
.secondary-font
- Used on any HTML elements which will use the site's secondary font face and size
.secondary-bg
- Used on any HTML elements which will use the site's secondary background color
- If the site's secondary bg color ever changes, only this class needs to be updated
#div-section-1
- Used only for positioning the block in question

There is no perfect answer for CSS granularity, but you will get better at identifying a reuseable class through experience.

##### Rule 2 - Not overly restricted by its name
*Violation #1*
```
<p class="twelve-pixel-font">text</p>
```
If you ever decide to change the font size of sections using this class from 12px to anything else, you will have a bad time. You will also have to rename the class for it to still make sense.

*Improvement #1*
```
<p class="medium-font">text</p>
```
This name is an improvement, because if the layout's 'medium' font size changes, we don't have to worry about renaming the class everywhere it appears.

*Violation #2*
```
<div class="red-bg">text</p>
```
Let's say the secondary background color on your site is red. It seems like 'red-bg' makes sense - right? Well, it makes sense now, but if we update the layout in the future and the secondary color changes from red to green - we're setting ourselves up for a sloppy transition.

*Improvement #2*
```
<div class="secondary-bg">text</p>
```
With this name, we retain the power to update our layout's colors in the future without having to re-write both our HTML and CSS. Simply naming the class 'secondary-bg' is a big improvement.

### CSS Selector priority
It is very common that one element will be targeted by multiple CSS selectors. In that case, which of the selectors' rules will be applied?

#### Default priority
```id```, ```class```, and ```element``` selectors are prioritized as follows:
1. ```id```
2. ```class```
3. ```element```

```
HTML:
<div id="main-bg" class="secondary-bg">test</div>
```
```
CSS:
div {
background-color: black;
}
#main-bg {
background-color: red;
}
.secondary-bg {
background-color: blue;
}
```
In the above example, all three CSS selectors are targeting the same element. There is an element selector ```div```, an ```id``` selector ```#main-bg```, and a ```class``` selector ```.secondary-bg```.

Looking at the 'default priority' above, we see the following: ```id``` > ```class``` > ```element```. Therefore, the id ```#main-bg``` takes precedence, so the element will have a red background color.

#### Even more specific selectors
As already stated, the most specific selector takes priority. By concatenating (combining) selectors, we can target elements with greater specificity.

Sample HTML:
```
<div id="wrapper">
  <div id="unique-id" class="generic-class">
    Text.
  </div>
</div>
```
We've seen that we can target the element ```div```, the id ```#unique-id```, and the class ```.generic-class```.

We could also target multiple selectors by combining them:
- ```div#unique-id``` is a selector for a ```div``` *which has an id of* ```unique-id```. 
 - Because ID's are unique per-page, targeting unique-id will suffice *most of the time*.
 - *The most specific selector takes priority.*
   - That means, if there is other CSS which targets ```#unique-id```, you can ensure yours takes priority by targeting the more specific ```div#unique-id```
- ```div.generic-class``` is a selector for a ```div``` *which has a class of* ```generic-class```.
 - Notice that the first two CSS examples have no space inbetween the element and the id/class
 - Having no space in between means that the id/class are attributes of that element.
- ```div .generic-class``` is a selector for an element with a class attribute of generic-class *and an ancestor div*.
 - The space in-between the element name and the class means that the selector(element) to the left of the space is an *ancestor* of the selector to the right of the space.
 - i.e. ```selector1 selector2 { /* properties */}```: Styles selector2 where selector1 is an ancestor of selector2.

#### The most specific selector wins. Use the ICE formula
The most specific selector can be calculated using the 'ICE' formula:
- **I** - Number of IDs
- **C** - Number of Classes
- **E** - Number of Elements

To determine which selector is more 'specific', calculate the 'ICE' value for each selector. Whichever selector has a higher ICE value is more specific. Let's show a few examples:

The HTML being referenced looks like:
```
<div id="wrapper" class="full-width">
  <div id="unique-id" class="generic-class">
    <p>
      Lorem Ipsum
      <ul>
        <li class="first">First item</li>
        <li>Second item</li>
        <li class="last">Third item</li>
    </p>
  </div>
</div>
```

**Using the ICE formula:**

Selector #1: ```#unique-id```
- There is 1 ID: ```#unique-id```
- There are 0 classes.
- There are 0 elements.

Using our ICE formula, we get a value of: **100**.

Selector #2: ```div#wrapper div#unique-id.generic-class```
- There are 2 ID's: ```#wrapper``` and ```#unique-id```
- There is 1 class: ```.generic-class```
- There are 2 elements: ```div``` and ```div```

Using our ICE formula, we get a value of: **212**.

Selector #3: ```div#wrapper.full-width div#unique-id.generic-class```
- There are 2 ID's: ```#wrapper``` and ```#unique-id```
- There are 2 classes: ```.full-width``` and ```.generic-class```
- There are 2 elements: ```div``` and ```div```

Using our ICE formula, we get a value of: **222**.

Our ICE values are:
- Selector #1: 100
- Selector #2: 212
- Selector #3: 222

**Selector #3** has the highest ICE value, so it takes priority.

#### Advanced selectors
There are more selectors than ID, Class, and Element selectors. They aren't as common, but you will come across a few of them.

The full, prioritized list is:
- Inline style
 - This is bad, don't use it.
- ID Selectors
- Pseudo-classes
 - Targets a state of an element
 - More commonly used examples:
   - Example 1: ```a:link``` (unvisited link)
    - Ex 2: ```a:visited``` (visited link)
    - Ex 3: ```a:hover``` (link with mouse over)
    - Ex 4: ```a:active``` (selected link)
    - Ex 5: ```div:first-child``` (selected link)
 - **Examples 1-4 are used on almost every website.** Others aren't used as frequently.
 - See the complete list here: http://www.w3schools.com/css/css_pseudo_classes.asp
- Attributes Selectors
 - Allows you to target an element's attributes directly, whatever they are
 - For example: ```div[name="test"]``` targets ```<div name="test"></div>```
- Class Selectors
- Element Selectors
- Universal Selectors
 - Selectors which target *every* element on the page
 - Good for 'baselining' browsers (i.e. setting the default margin of all elements to 0)
 - Looks like: ```* { /* properties that apply to everything go here */ }```
 - Rarely needed on projects

##### Long-version of the ICE Formula
The full formula is
- Inline style (N)
- ID selectors (I)
- Pseudo-classes (P)
- Attributes selectors (A)
- Class selectors (C)
- Element selectors (E)
- Universal selectors (U)

So.. **NIPACEU**.

*NIPACEU* isn't *quite* as memorable, and it is unlikely that you'll find yourself needing to use it.

## Core CSS Properties
Now that we're experts at identifying *what* to style, let's learn about what styling properties we can apply.
### Positioning Properties
#### Display
The display property specifies the type of box used for an HTML element.
Default value: Inline

- Display: inline
 - Displays an element as an inline element (like words in a sentence)
 - This is the default value for 'display'.
- Display: block
 - Makes an element behave like it is a block - similar to how a paragraph behaves.
- Display: inline-block
 - The *inside* of the element behaves like a block, and the *outside* of it is inline with surrounding elements.
- Display: none
 - The element is not displayed at all.
- Display: list-item
 - The element behaves as if it is an item in a list.
- Display: initial
 - Makes an element use the default value for display.
- Display: inherit
 - Makes an element inherit its parent's value for display.
- Complete list of Display options:
 - inline
 - block
 - flex
 - inline-block
 - inline-flex
 - inline-table
 - list-item
 - run-in
 - table
 - table-caption
 - table-column-group
 - table-header-group
 - table-footer-group
 - table-row-group
 - table-cell
 - table-column
 - table-row
 - none
 - initial
 - inherit
*For detailed information on these, take a look at http://www.w3schools.com/cssref/pr_class_display.asp .*

#### Float
When an item is floated to the left or right, it moves as far to that side as it can.
- Float: Left
 - Element moves as far left as possible.
- Float: Right
 - Element moves as far right as possible.
- Float: None
 - Element displays normally (This is the default).
- Float: Initial
 - Value is default (none).
- Float: Inherit
 - Inherits this property from its parent.

#### Position
- Position: relative
 - The element is positioned relative to it's default position.
 - This allows you to adjust the default position (left:20; top:20).
- Position: absolute
 - Element becomes relative to the first non-static ancestor element.
- Position: fixed
 - Element is positioned relative to the browser window itself.
 - This is useful for pinning a menu to the top of a browser window.
- Position: static
 - Default value, element is positioned naturally in the document.
- Position: initial
 - Value is default (static).
- Position: inherit
 - Inherits this property from its parent.

### Spacing Properties
#### Margin
- Margin refers to spacing *outside* of an element.
 - Example: http://www.w3schools.com/css/tryit.asp?filename=trycss_margin_sides
 - Options:
   - margin-top: 2px;
    - margin-right: 2px;
    - margin-bottom: 2px;
    - margin-left: 2px;
#### Padding
- Padding refers to spacing *inside* of an element.
 - Example: http://www.w3schools.com/css/tryit.asp?filename=trycss_padding_sides
 - Options:
   - padding-top: 2px;
    - padding-right: 2px;
    - padding-bottom: 2px;
    - padding-left: 2px;

### Styling / finishing touches
#### Colors (Hex codes)
Hex codes are 6 digit codes specifying which color the browser should render.

You should definitely know the hex codes for at least black and white by heart.
- Black: #000000
- White: #FFFFFF

Find other hex codes you like? Add them to the list and submit a pull request!

@tip: You can use the 'inspect' tool to see what the hex codes used on popular websites are.
#### Fonts
Fonts can be specified using the following syntax:
```
font: [style] [size] [family];
```
For example:
```
body {
font: italic 12px "Times New Roman", Times, serif;
}
```
Where ```italic``` is the style, ```12px``` is the size, and ```"Times New Roman", Times, serif``` is the family.

##### Font style
- normal
- italic
- oblique
- initial
- inherit

Example:
```
body {
font-style: italic;
}
```

##### Font family
A prioritized list of font family names.

- *Font family name*
 - For example: ```font-family: "times", "courier", "arial";```
   - If times is available, it will be used. If not, courier will be used if available. If also unavailable, arial will be used.
 - On enterprise projects, your designer will likely tell you what the font families are.
- initial
- inherit

Example:
```
body {
font-family: "Times New Roman", times, courier, arial;
}
```
If ```Times New Roman``` is available, it will be used, if not, ```times``` is used when available - etc.

##### Font size
Font size sets, you guessed it, the size of the font.

Font sizes can be set using pixels (```font-size: 12px;```), em (```font-size: .9em```), or rem (```font-size: 1rem```).

###### Set size with pixels
Setting font sizes using pixels is the easiest.

12px is always 12px, regardless of the rest of the page or browser.

```
body {
font-size: 12px;
}
```

Try out a few font sizes to see what you like. 12px is generally the default body font size.

###### Set size with em
A downside to setting font sizes with pixels is that you may not always want the same exact font size regardless of browser.

Browsers have different default font sizes for a reason. For example, a mobile device's browser likely has a smaller default font size than a desktop's browser. This is where ```em``` comes in.

Em sets the font as a percentage (1em = 100%) of the closest ancestor. To determine how big an em font size would be in pixels, compute the following:

**Em is a calculated value.** This is the formula: ```[FS in em] X [parent's FS in px] = FS in px```

For example:
```
HTML:
<body>
  <div id="wrapper">
    <div class="large-font">
    What size font am I?
    </div>
  </div>
  <footer class="large-font">
    What size font am I?
  </footer>
</body>
```
```
Corresponding CSS:
body {
  font-size: 12px;
}
#wrapper {
  font-size: 2em;
}
.large-font {
  font-size: 2em;
}
```
####### What is the font size of #wrapper, in pixels?
To determine the font size (FS) of ```#wrapper```, in pixels, we need to apply our formula: ```[closest ancestor's FS in px] X [chosen FS in em]```
Let's fill in our variables:
```[FS in em] X [parent's FS in px] = FS in px```
What is the ```[FS in em]```? The CSS says the ```#wrapper```'s FS is ```2em```.
What is the ```[parent's FS in px]```? The parent of the ```div``` with id ```#wrapper``` is the ```body```, and we see in our CSS that the body's font size is 12px.
Let's update our formula: ```2 X 12``` = ```24px```.
Therefore, ```#wrapper``` is 24px in our HTML document.

Let's add a comment to our CSS so we don't forget:
```
Corresponding CSS:
body {
  /* Assume 12px default font size for desktop browsers */
}
#wrapper {
  font-size: 2em; /* 12px x 2em = 24px on desktop */
}
.large-font {
  font-size: 3em;
}
```

What size, in pixels, is the ```div``` with class of ```.large-font```?  
```[FS in em] X [parent's FS in px]```  
```[FS in em]``` = ```3```.  
```[parent's FS in px]``` = ```24px```. The parent of the div is ```#wrapper```, and we just calculated that as ```24px```. Cool!  
```3 X 24px``` = ```72px```. That escalated quickly.

What size, in pixels, is the ```footer``` element with class of ```.large-font```?  
```[FS in em] X [parent's FS in px]```  
```[FS in em]``` = ```3```.  
```[parent's FS in px]``` = ```12px```. This time, the parent div is the body.  
```3 X 12px``` = ```36px```. Hmm. The ```.large-font``` class is 36px for one element, but 72px for another? This could get confusing.

#### Backgrounds
You can assign a background color and/or background image to any element, including the ```body``` element, ```header``` element, ```div``` elements, and all the rest.
For example:
```
body {
  background-color: red;
}
```
##### Image backgrounds
To use an image as a background, first set the background-image property as the image you want to use:
```
body {
  background-image: url('images/main-bg');
}
```
But what if the image is smaller than the window? Will it only display once? Where will it display? Will it repeat? That's up to you.  

Your options for *where* the background image is positioned are set using the  ```background-position``` property, with horizontal and vertical components:  

Always specify both the horizontal and vertical options, in that order:
- ```background-position: [horizontal option] [vertical option];```  
- Horizontal options: ```left```, ```right```, and ```center```.  
- Vertical options: ```top```, ```center```, and ```bottom```.  

Your options for how the background image 'repeats' are set using the  ```background-repeat``` property, with the following possible options:
- ```repeat``` (vertical and horizontal)
- ```repeat-x``` (horizontal only)
- ```repeat-y``` (vertical only)
- ```no-repeat``` (show image once only)

In this example, we have an image named main-bg.jpg which we would like repeated horizontally across the body of the page.
```
body {
  background-image: url('images/main-bg.jpg');
  background-repeat: repeat-x;
  background-position: left top;
}
```

##### Color backgrounds

@media-query

## How do I use it with HTML?
1. Place all of your CSS into its own .css file.
 - For example, 'css/style.css' can contain only the example code above.
2. In-between the HTML file's <head></head> tags, place the following:
 - ```<link href="css/style.css" media="all" rel="stylesheet">```
 - Set the 'href' attribute as the relative path to the CSS file.
 - This makes the CSS in your file be used by your HTML page.

